In a previous unit, we discussed
how we're dealing with time and
sequential logic in computing systems.
What we'll do in this unit is actually
talk about the actual elements,
the chips that will allow us to do,
provide this kind of functionality.
So, let us say,
let us recall how we started the last unit
where we started the way we deal with
time, we add integer time units.
At every time unit t, we want something
that can depend with value to compute some
kind of function and the output.
Some kind of function and the value at the
previous time unit, the time t minus 1.
So what kind of element do we need in
order to provide such a functionality?
Well, the missing element,
we need something as a very basic point,
is we need something to actually
remember one bit of information,
move one bit of information
from time t minus 1 to time t.
This is what we have missing.
We have lots of combinatorial log,
logic so
far that can do any kind of manipulations
that we want within a single time unit.
But actually moving information
from time t minus 1 to time t is
something that is still missing.
Now, if we look about that kind
of thing in the way we're,
we're in this abstract way that we're
thinking about these discrete time units,
at that exact time when we switch between
time unit t minus 1 to time unit t.
This new element must remember the bit.
At that point it has to remember
what happened previously and
carry it on to the next stage.
Without that we cannot have
this kind of functionality.
Now, this means that at this transition
point between two consecutive time units
it must have state.
It must remember whether it's now
remembering 0 or it's now remembering 1.
That means it has to be in two different
physical states in, in its implementation.
These two physical states,
it must be able to move
between them according to the logic
of the previous time unit.
Which means, which means it needs to
be able to flip between these two
kind of different, two,
two different physical states.
An element that can do that thing,
that can flip change situation between
two different kind of such
states are called Flip-Flops.
They flip to 0 and
then can flop back to 1, and
the point is that this flipping and
flopping is something they remember.
It's not just a function
of the current input, but
its something internal to them
they remember between time units.
So let us view now the basic
flip flops that we will you,
be using in this course which is
called the Clocked Data Flip Flop.
This flip flop has a single input and
a single output and it basically
remembers the input from last time unit
and outputs it in the next time unit.
So, if we again look at
the diagram of our time units and
assume that our input looks like this.
If it starts with a value of 1,
its time unit 1 goes down to 0 for
time units 2 and 3, and
then goes up to 1 and down to 0 again.
Then when we look at what the D flip
flop will do, at any time unit it
will actually return the value that was
in the input in the previous time unit.
So at time 1, we don't exactly know what
our output will be because we haven't
specified what happened in
the previous time unit.
So for us, it's gray,
we just don't know what the output is.
But once we get to time unit 2, then we
know exactly what the output needs to be.
It needs to be exactly what
the input was at time 1.
Similarly at time unit 3, we know it
has to be 0 because that was what
was the input was at time 2, and so on.
At every time point we are having simply
the previous signal that was fed to
the input,
shifted one time unit to the right.
And this is what
the Clocked Data Flip Flop does.
And this is going to be the only
element that will provide
all the sequential logic
that we need in this course.
And from this we'll need all the kinds of
the sequential circuitry that we need,
memories, counters, and so on.
One thing that I'd like to mention at
this point is the meaning of the little
triangles that we see at the bottom,
at the bottom of the D flip flop diagram.
The meaning of this is that
we have a sequential chip,
a chip that depends on time.
As opposed to all previous chips are all
combinatorial chips that we had so
far, whose output only depended on their
own inputs at any given point in time.
Here we have a chip whose output also
depends on what happened previously and
state that's kept inside this chip.
This is the only point that we care for
this logical dependency of time.
Although it's probably also interesting
to note that in any physical
implementation of a D flip flop.
This means that the implementation
will also need some kind of
access to this clock that we
mentioned in the last unit,
that actually breaks down the physical
continuous time into discrete time units.
Again we won't care about this because
we're living in our abstraction of
discrete time, but
from our point of view this is just a way
to remember that this chip has state.
And can remember and ha, and, and,
depends out and its output also depends
on what happens in previous time units.
Now at this point, let us say,
just say one word about
the implementation of the D Flip Flop.
In this course, we are going to deal with
it as a completely primitive operation.
This is something given to you that cannot
be manufactured from anything else.
But just, you are going to use it,
just like you viewed the Nand gate and
from D Flip Flop, and
the Nand gate you will provide, you will
actually build everything in the course.
In many other courses,
you actually eh, follow what
happens in most real life hardware.
You can actually construct the flip flop
from Nand gates eh, when you actually
take the Nand gate and put them into some
kind of a loop eh, between each other.
This kind of loop basically has them
amplifying the same signal again and
it allows them to get stuck
either in a zero or one state.
And with some additional logic you
will also be able to manipulate this
date from the outside.
Eh, this kind of logic
usually has two steps.
The first step is one, is what I've just
described having this kind of cycle that
allows it to somehow remember information.
And the second type step is to actually
have some kind of logic that actually
provide isolation between
subsequent time units.
We will not describe in this course how
this is done even though it's extremely
elegant and beautiful because we
basically think it's confusing.
We do not think that is the right way
to think about a logical circuitry.
We think that it's cont, completely
worthwhile to keep separate in your head.
The combinatorial logic which
happens instantaneously and
the sequential logic which we don't
want to, to thinking about how it,
how it is constructed from lower
levels combinatorial stuff.
But rather think about it
as its own primitive block.
So now that we can remember one bit
from this, we can build everything else.
In fact, there is a generic paradigm
of how we're going to build
all our logic in the computer, and
it's going to be a combination of
remembering information via
this basic D flip flops.
And then manipulating them using
combinatorial logics that we built in
the first two lectures.
So in particular the usual way we do
things is we have an array of D flip flops
which basically compromise all
of our memory in the system.
Their output is going to be fed
into some combinatorial logic
together with the new input
that you get in this time unit.
And all of this is going to change the
state that we have in the D flip flop for
the next time unit.
This is the general way we're going to
build everything whether it's a memory or
a counter.
For example, if it's a counter we're going
to remember a number in all these flip
flops and the combinatorial logic will
basically add one to the counter.
In this way, every time unit,
the new value that we have will
be 1 more than the old unit.
Let us say, actually now look at the first
bit that we're actually going to the first
device, the first chip that we're going
to actually be, build from a D flip flop.
And this is a device that actually builds,
remembers a bit forever.
So the D flip flop provided the basic
functionality of remembering a bit for
one time unit.
If we want to build a memory we want
something that can remember a bit forever.
We store it,
we tell now start remembering this bit and
then it keeps on remembering the bit.
Such a device, such as chip eh,
is defined by the following API,
by the following chip that we
have that we call the bit chip.
It has two inputs,
an input bit and a load bit.
Once we take the load bit and
put the 1 into it we want to
remember the input bit at that time.
When the load bit goes down to
zero we want to the, the chip to
keep remembering the last time that the,
the last input that was loaded into it for
infinity until a new load
operation is performed.
So this is basically
the logic that we have.
If load at time t minus 1 is 1,
then we want to the, the next out,
the out at time t to be exactly
the input at time t minus 1.
Otherwise, we want to output the time t
to just keep on being what it is now.
Basically the old value that we
remember the same as out t minus 1.
How can we build such a chip
from our humble D flip flop?
Before we look at that,
let us see what this bit chip needs to do.
So again, let's look at two possible
signals for load and for in.
So for example, we ask for loading in time
units 1 and time unit 4, while input is,
let's say it's 1 in the first time
unit and then it goes down, down to 0.
So let's see what do we expect
the output of this bit gate to be.
Well on the first time unit
we don't know the history so
we have no idea what the output is,
let's put it in gray.
Now in time unit 2,
it's supposed to be, since we asked for
a load at time unit 1, we,
what we want in time unit 2 is for
the output is to be exactly
like the input at time unit 1.
Because we have a load at time 1,
the value of any time 1 is 1,
the output at time 2 should be 1.
Now after that, load goes down to 0 for
the next 2 time units.
So basically what we want is we want the
same output to, the same output to remain,
just because load is going
to 0 even if input changes.
So we're going to keep on maintaining
the same value for the next 2 time units
until load goes up to 1 and then we'll
have to see what we're going to do.
Now notice at for this time units,
whatever input was,
whether input went up or
down, it does not matter.
In any case,
we will not change the output of our chip.
Now let's see what happened
at the fourth time unit.
At thefourth time unit, load goes up to 1.
Load goes up to 1, so now we're asking
the chip to load the value again,
and the value that we load is
the value of in right now,
which is the value at
time four which is zero.
Notice that, that we have to load at time
four, but this will only affect the output
at time five, because the output
at time five is basically
the change to the input at time four, only
if load at time four asked it to do it.
So that means that at time 5,
our output will go down to 0 as planned.
So this is the intended
functionality of the 1-Bit Register.
How can we do that?
How can we pipe and
pipe the value that we remember so
it will keep on being remembered
until we ask, we ask to change it?
Well here is the first naive approach.
We will take the output,
what we currently remember and
let's plug it back into
the input of the D flip flop.
And this way, the D flip flop,
unless we tell it to load the new value,
we just keep on having the same value and
looping inside it if you wish.
This is a very basic the ba,
the correct idea in general but
of course this is not the real chip.
How do we connect?
How do we put the real input in,
if we want to also put the output of
the D flip flop back into itself?
How does this connection done?
So this doesn't quite work, really the way
to combine these two possible sources
into the D flip-flop, one source which is
an output from the previous stage, and
another source which is a new input.
And which one of them we want to actually
plug into the D flip-flop depends of
course on whether the load bit is set or
not.
But we already know exactly how to
combine two sources into one output and
this is exactly the multiplexer.
So, if we actually take the input and
fit it into one input of the multiplexer.
Take the previous output and fit it into
another input of the multiplexer and
then load, choose between them,
this is exactly the correct functionality.
We can actually see how that
works by following step by step.
So, let's try to follow
this implementation and
see how it works eh, real time.
Again, let us take two
possible example inputs,
load them in that we get from some
other source that we don't care about.
And see what our new implementation
does when it's fed these two signals and
inputs, and what it produces as output.
Let us start with time step 1,
at time step 1 the ma, there is 1 point,
piece of information that we don't know.
We don't know what the previous
state of the D flip flop was,
what the previous out was because
it's not specified in this example.
So for
us it's going to be a question mark.
All the other bits we can complete.
We know that in is one because
that's what we see in our input.
We know that load is 1 and so on.
Now notice that the multiplexer here,
because load is 1 and
because in is 1 even though we don't know
what is the input to its other input.
To its eh, down to its lower input,
we still can tell very well
what the output is, what the output of the
multiplexer is and that's going to be 1.
Now eh, that we know what the input to
the D flip flop at time unit 1 is, so
even though we don't know
the output at this point time unit
we know everything about the input.
Now we can see,
now this implies exactly what is going
to happen in the next time step.
In the next time step,
the one that was the input
of the D flip flop is going to be passed
and is going to be the output of the D
flip flop in the next time unit exactly
when we switch between time units.
Now we can fill up the rest
of the information about what
happens in the second time unit.
In the second time unit,
we know what in is, that was our input.
We know what load is,
we have the previous out so
we can calculate exactly
what the multiplexer does.
And the multiplexer basically,
basically picks the previous output
from the ori,
from the old value of the DFF.
And then we exactly, we again, we know
what the input to the, to the D, D,
D flip flop is going to be.
It is going to be again a 1, and
this we can keep on doing step after step.
At each point in time we
know the previous values.
We know what load is, we know what in is,
we can compute what the next situation is,
and at every given point in time,
we can write down the values and
all the different wires just like we did,
did in combinatorial logic.
And as we see, this implementation
actually provides the required
functionality, the functionality of
whenever load is being pulled to high.
We load the input from in and keep it
until the next time that a load is asked.
So at this point, we've looked,
we've, we've looked at
what is the basic unit that allows us
to do sequential logic on a computer.
And we've built the first interesting
element from it, our one bit memory.
Once we have a one bit memory, in the next
unit we'll actually build a whole
huge memory of lots and
lots of bytes and words.